As we've discussed earlier,
the reason for
going through the clustering process is
to help simplify a situation where you
have way too many objects to deal with
individually, but where it could be
painfully problematic to try to deal
with all of the objects in the same way.
So with clustering,
we're trying to get to a middle ground
that can make dealing with all of
the objects a little simpler, but yet
still maintain effectiveness.
But something to keep in mind is that
not every object in a specific cluster
will match perfectly with every other
object in that cluster, especially when
dealing with a large number of variables
to determine that clustering solution.
It may well be that for a given
variable, an object might match better
with those objects in
an entirely different cluster.
But again, clustering takes into
account all of the variables, and
groups the objects where the similar
objects that are assigned to the same
cluster, have predominantly
the same characteristics.
Let's take a quick look
at what I mean by this.
Here we have two clusters of stores.
Cluster 1 could be described as stores
that are in a cold climate, have a high
population density and have a bigger
retail footprint for their stores.
Cluster 2 could be described
as being in a hot climate
with a lower population density and
tend to be smaller stores.
But as you can see, Store 6 doesn't
quite fit all of those descriptors.
It actually has a bigger footprint
than one of the stores in Cluster 1.
But overall, Store 6 fits better with
Cluster 2, rather than Cluster 1.
So when we're talking about how many
clusters we should have in our solution,
we need to consider that fewer clusters
might create more of this kind of
situation, but more clusters may
not work out as well operationally.
Because there's not really
an objectively measured best clustering
solution, there's really no objective
test for that best number of clusters.
What we're trying to do is to get to
a solution that gets us the best overall
results for whatever the business
problem is that we're trying to solve.
The point is that determining the number
of clusters is not always the easiest or
most apparent choice.
Let's take a look at
a fairly simple set of data.
How many clusters should there be?
Two, four, six?
Sometimes it really comes down to
a balance of what is practical and
what best fits the data.